Just as I made clear when discussing algorithmic probability [todo: make it clear], I don't know what would happen to us if we put ourselves in a computer simulation and couldn't tell which computer we were in. No one does. All I am saying is that if that is a scientific question, then we currently have no clue what would happen to us in that situation and we ought to have a discussion in which we wildly speculate about some of the possibilities. I am just trying to start that discussion.

What are space and time? Even though both concepts come quite intuitively to us, it is hard to define exactly what they are. Luckily, what is important in daily life is not what space and time mean, but agreeing on standard ways of measuring them. In the past, people would define a unit of length as a length of a particular object, so anyone with an object of that length could measure distance in that unit. Time is trickier because we all seem to have internal clocks in our heads but no good way to count off the ticks. So what people did was pick a process that repeats at seemingly equal intervals according to the internal clocks in our heads, and define that interval as a unit of time. Then anyone who could start a process that repeated at the same interval would have a clock that measured in the same unit.

The problem with defining distances and time intervals that way is that our standard rulers and clocks tended to degrade over time. So as our scientific knowledge increased, we turned to defining distances and time intervals based on seemingly fundamental constants of the universe. For example, we currently define a second as how long it takes light emitted a certain way from a cesium atom to travel a number of periods, and we define a meter as a certain fraction of a second. [cite wikipedia] But computer simulations that we put ourselves in might not have either light or cesium atoms!

Defining standard units of distance and time across different computer simulations is an interesting problem. For one thing, people inside simulations can't measure distances in our world unless given they're given tools to do so, and what they perceive as distance isn't perceived by us as a physical quantity. The closest we get to that is putting some projection of their world on a computer monitor, but since we can display their world at any scale we want, there is no single "right" way to do this.

At first glance, time may appear to be better synced up between people running the simulation and people inside it, but that isn't really the case. For example, we can have multiple computers running the same simulation at different speeds, and it's even possible to store the entire history of a simulation on disk and copy it between computers in whatever order we want.

Given this, it doesn't seem to make sense to try to define a single distance or time interval that people in different simulations will agree is the same. But that alone shouldn't stop us from trying to define distance and time in simulations anyway. After discovering relativity, people realized that observers moving relative to each other will measure distance and time slightly differently, but rather than not defining distance and time in relativity altogether, we just accounted for that in our definitions. Likewise, even though measurements of distance and time may not match up between people in different simulations, I don't think that alone should stop us from trying to find a standard definition that anyone living in a simulation can use.

Ideally, such definitions would have the property that if people used them to measure distance and time between different pairs of points that are isomorphic by some mathematical property, then they'd both get the same number. But this is a pretty high bar to hit while still being consistent with what we intuitively feel space and time are. So rather than trying to come up with such definitions directly (and possibly have bad definitions), I think it's a better idea to start by thinking of those vague intuitive properties that we'd want these definitions to have, and try to improve from there until we have definitions that can be expressed mathematically.

I don't know about you, but when I close my eyes, I can pretend that the world as we know it doesn't exist, but even then there is still a little clock in my head that keeps spinning. Indeed, it's hard for my limited imagination to imagine a situation where I can live in a computer simulation without having that internal clock in my head, because if it stopped then I'd be dead. To emphasize, it could just be the case that I simply haven't thought of a way to imagine such a situation, and if you think of a way to do that then you're welcome to suggest it to me. But just so that we have somewhere to start, let's forget about space for the moment and make the assumption that we'd want our definition of time in a computer simulation to match up with how we ourselves perceive it.

What would that imply? For one thing, such a definition would easily get out of sync with the atomic clocks that are the gold standard for time measurement today. (Try keeping your internal clock in sync with an atomic clock before and after sitting on a hot stove.) And it would just as easily get out of sync between 2 different people trying to measure time. (Again think of the hot stove example.) But is it really our fault if the clocks in our heads don't match up with the synchronized atomic clocks, or is it actually the atomic clocks' fault for failing to match how we perceive time? I could well be wrong here, but the goal is to make the most general definition of time possible, I'd imagine it's the latter. You may well be able to put yourself in a computer simulation, but if the simulation doesn't have atoms then you won't be able to bring that atomic clock with you.

Neuroscientists have done experiments to try to figure out how our brain measures time, and what they've found is that generally speaking, the more you remember about something happening, the longer you perceive it to have lasted. [http://eagleman.com/blog/item/6-brain-time] Thus, it would make sense for everything to seem to slow down if you sit on a hot stove, because a part of your brain that makes memories goes into overdrive when you think you're in danger. An extreme example in the other direction is that if someone is knocked out and revived hours later, it's not unheard for them to feel that no time passed in between, which makes sense because they couldn't remember anything about what happened in that period.

There is still a lot missing from our picture of what you might perceive if you are in a computer simulation that diverges into multiple simultaneous possibilities, but I think this is enough to speculate about what you'd perceive in certain cases. Let's start with the easiest case I can think of.

Suppose you're in a computer simulation. Then we pause the simulation and copy the simulation state onto many different computers. On one of those computers, we update the simulation state to be almost the same state except with everything moved a tiny bit -- basically something reasonable. On all of the other computers, we reboot into a recovery partition and overwrite the entire simulation state with a bunch of random gobbledygook bits. What is the (approximate) probability that you find yourself in each of the computers at this point?

[insert bad drawing here]

Well, let's see. In the computer where we made something reasonable happen, you are still alive and hopefully your virtual brain learned a little bit about what happened in the virtual world in that brief period of time. In all the other computers, not only are you dead, but all your memories and the entire virtual universe itself has been completely wiped out and turned into random gobbledygook. So there's approximately a 100% chance that you find yourself in the "reasonable" computer and a 0% chance that you're in the "random" ones, right?

Not so fast! We're not going to give up on the "random" simulations just yet! Because what we're going to do now is take one of those computers we overwrote the memory of, and overwrite its memory with freshly generated random gobbledygook again. And again. And again. And if we keep that for long enough, say a few gazillion years, then by pure chance, eventually one of those sequences of random bits is going to look an awful lot like that one sitting in the computer where we made something reasonable happen. Who knows, maybe one day those sequences of bits will be exactly the same!

[another bad drawing here]

So what is the probability that you're in each of the computers now? Remember that how we got into this mess in the first place was by speculating that perhaps you can't tell which computer you're in if they both run the same simulation. So if these 2 computers now have the same simulation state, then you'd have exactly the same memory of what happened in both and you wouldn't be able to distinguish which of those computers you're in. And the concept of a probability that you're in one computer and not the other wouldn't make sense.

But now there's 2 ways you could have gotten there. Either you could have gotten there directly, or you could have gotten there by having your computer's memory being overwritten with random gobbledygook a few gazillion times. Surely you must have noticed if the entire universe you're in turned into random gobbledygook for a few gazillion years!

But remember that according to the studies done by neuroscientists, the more you remember about something happening, the more time you perceive passing. And when your brain is a bunch of random gobbledygook, you're not going to remember anything about the state of your virtual world at that point. So like the people who wake up in the hospital after being knocked out for hours, when your brain eventually turns into something reasonable by pure chance, I imagine you'd perceive that hardly any time passed at all! So it makes sense if you couldn't tell which way your virtual universe got to that "reasonable" state.

Speaking of which...

When physicists make predictions about our real, non-virtual, physical universe, they often draw these pictures called Feynman diagrams [do I need to mention that?] to keep track of the possible ways an event could have happened.
for a while, had a certain way of predicting prob that particle goes to places based on possible paths it could take there
but then realized slightly wrong, to get right answer had to make small correction that involved...

outline:
reread feynman lecture
people have concept of distance and time in heads, but need to agree on it btwn multiple people so we agree on standard ways of counting it
I can close my eyes and pretend world doesn't exist, but hard for my limited imagination to imagine living without internal clock in head, b/c if it stopped then would be dead
so tentatively define time as however we perceive it in our heads
	different from what clocks would measure e.g. if sit on stove
speculation6 stuff
