start with pure quantum state of you, approximate as mixed quantum state of you in future, entropy of entanglement cutoff
	entropy on pure states?
some subjectivity on how to approximate as mixed state so probably more rigorous procedure to do this, if you know please email me

partial traces, cptp maps meant to work on quantum state of universe
but if we do this calculation where "you" is quantum state of universe, predicts you'll see both 0 or 1 (like outside observers)
doesn't match with intuition
what we really need is quantum state of you specifically
not trivial (free will lecture), completely subjective, SM won't tell you how to do this
even if we ignore philosophical questions about what is quantum state of you such as free will, you still have to partition quantum state of universe so accurately that...


Partial trace and c map work great when you are trying to model particles moving through a predictable environment, such as an alpha particle moving through the air or a qubit in a quantum computer. But in this case, you essentially have to (3 things I already wrote)

Like saying the answer to your question is f(x) and not providing any way to determine what x is. This is about as unhelpful as not answering the question at all.

For a physicists take on how little we know about what it means to be "you", see here. (Footnote: He went even further than me and suggested that we don't even know if we can predict our actions using classical or quantum information. If we are fundamentally made out of classical information, then the standard model definitely cannot answer the 0 or 1 question!)


Hedge this:
The only way I can think of to do X is to y
To the best of my understanding, you have to...
Decoherence math techniques might help here (I am confused by their math), but this question is so sensitive to who "you" are that I don't know whether they would be enough
  Seem like workarounds rather than solutions to the underlying problem
If you know of a way to predict this with standard model, please email me
  Remove confident sounding conclusion

Note to self: standard model fields are amplitudes for finding particle of each type at each point

How do you experimentally determine partition between you and not you? By definition you cannot experimentally determine what quantum state of not you is (but you can measure it by becoming entangled with it) and no one else can experimentally determine partition of you and not you

If you try to predict, run into free will question that quantum doesn't answer

Alternate footnote: according to Scott A, it is an unsolved problem whether you are made out of classical or quantum information. But if you are made out of classical information, that would mean you can't even model you as a quantum state and the [no cloning theorem] would not prevent making unlimited [copies of you inside different simulations](mind uploading). In that case we'd definitely need a new physics theory to predict which simulation you'd find yourself in! Perhaps I should check with him if that is really what he meant...
Check: can classical information be made out of quantum bits?

One thing about a question like "who are you" is that the answer is different for everyone, and if "you" are a quantum state entangled with the larger quantum state of the universe, standard model doesn't give you a way to figure out which parts of the quantum state of the universe are "you" vs "not you". This is a real issue when you want to try to answer questions like these (wait but why). Some proposed theories of everything like digital physics are a lot less sensitive to how you answer this question, which is why I think they are promising.


Link to:
free will
Who proposes as toe? Eray Ozkural, Max Tegmark, Juergen Schmidhuber, anyone else important?
Elon musk suggests live in sim but not learning algorithms

Footnotes:
/ In theoretical computer science, a computer is a universal Turing machine with unlimited memory and time to do calculations, but that cannot solve the halting problem. Everywhere else, a computer is an actual, physical machine that does calculations in real time and can run out of disk space and I don't care what "Turing degree" it has. When physicists informally say "we might be living in a computer simulation," they rarely make this distinction clear, which can easily cause confusion. Also, it's possible to study physics from an information theory perspective without assuming that the universe is fundamentally the output of a Turing machine.

/ Ask AI to make brain computer interface

Why not define you to include future? While you can indeed define you this way, at fundamental level we don't know what our future behavior will be. Defining you this way does not solve this underlying problem but scientific method does

Why does it matter which one is the real you if they are both you? You see both isn't an option, one version of you sees 0, another version sees 1, which version are you

Technically not an algorithm

Doesn't matter which language

Algorithmic probability usually described in terms of Turing machines, there are many potential meanings and I give a different variation than the one in the link (checked with someone), important part is it converges

If those Wikipedia articles make your head explode (don't worry, they do that to me too), here's a somewhat more accessible introduction to the [problems harder than halting problem].

/ Solomonoff induction in real life
