For the last several decades, computing power has essentially grown at an exponential rate, and it always looked as if in about 10 years into the future we would run into some seemingly unsurmountable problem that would prevent computing power from significantly increasing beyond that. But each time that prediction was made, sometime later people would find a solution to that! So multiple people have tried to extrapolate what would happen if this trend continued, making a ton of dubious assumptions in the process, but everyone who's done that ends up predicting that computers become "smart" (as in as smart as every human on earth smart) sometime around 2060, plus or minus a few years. (note: source is conversation with ramsay) That's probably within my lifetime! So it's fun to speculate about what these computers from around 2060 would be capable of. Even if those predictions are wrong and it takes much longer for computers to become "smart," it's fun to speculate about what really powerful computers would be capable of anyway.

Virtual reality simulations are already pretty good these days. I'd imagine that virtual reality simulations around 2060 would be *really* good, possibly so good that to a virtual person living in one, it would look pretty convincingly like a real universe. Now the simulation doesn't have to be programmed to behave anything like our universe. Our universe behaves with some sort of combination of general relativity and the standard model, but the simulation doesn't have to behave that way and people in the future could program it to behave any way they wanted. That said, if we wanted to predict what the simulation would do, we could still in theory measure the states that all of the particles in the computer were in, and use the standard model and general relativity (or even just look at the computer program and the hardware specs) to get a pretty damn good idea of how the simulation would behave. So no surprises there.

But still, wouldn't it be fun to live in one of these simulations that doesn't have to behave like our universe? Perhaps it could be done like this. People have already done experiments where they put implants into mice brains and had them communicate with each other. (note: cite this) In 2060, it wouldn't be too much of a stretch to suppose that people could do this with human brains as well, and that there could be so much bandwidth transfer between the brains that people hooked up this way would feel like a single person. After all, single celled organisms came before multicellular organisms, and you can think of multicellular organisms such as us as a bunch of single-celled organisms hooked up in such a way that they're dependent on each other. Despite that, we each still feel like a single person. So how would it feel if we hooked up multiple people's brains together? Better yet, what if we hooked up one of our brains to the brain of someone in a computer simulation? Would we collectively feel like a single person then?

We won't know that until we actually try it. Right now we can't do that so we don't know the answer. I think it is reasonable to assume that the answer is yes, and the rest of paper assumes that the answer is yes too. If the answer is no then the rest of this paper is completely irrelevant. I guess we'll find out in the not too distant future!

So let's say someone does that and they are now a single person that lives in both the real world and a virtual reality world. And then the part of the person living in the real world gets into a tragic accident and gets their brain blasted into a million pieces, and no more nondeterministic data (such as what the real word side of the person is thinking) is fed into the simulation. How unfortunate. But now they completely live in a virtual reality world that doesn't have to behave anything like our own! How awesome is that? Of course, the part of the person that was in the real world also happened to program the virtual reality simulation, and they transferred their knowledge to the virtual reality part of their brain when they got hooked up. So the person now in the virtual reality can still predict what will happen to them in terms of general relativity and the standard model, so in a sense they still really live in our universe.

By the way, I made another assumption there, which is that when the real world part of the brain got blasted into a million pieces, the person still lived on in the virtual reality world instead of just dying. I think this is a realistic assumption because people have done surgeries where they removed half of someone's brain and they still lived on OK. (note: cite) If this turns out not to hold true with part of the brain in the real world and part of the brain in a virtual reality world, then the rest of this paper is completely irrelevant. I hope we'll find out about that in the not too distant future as well!

If these assumptions are correct, we now succeeded in getting someone from living completely in the real world to living to the greatest extent possible in a virtual reality world. If our technology progresses fast enough, that person may very well be you or me! And even though that person knows that they really live in a bigger universe that follows general relativity and the standard model, the virtual reality simulation sure *feels* convincing.

Now there's something that you can do with virtual reality simulations that I find really fascinating. I don't know how computers will work in 2060, but computers right now have dedicated places where they store their current state, such as memory and hard disks. It's possible to hibernate the computer so that its current state is frozen onto disk, copy the data on the disk to a second computer with the same specs, then start up both computers. If both computers operate correctly and the simulation is completely deterministic, then when the simulation resumes, it will behave the same way on both computers.

This raises a question I find really interesting. If someone did this to 2060-era computers running deterministic virtual reality simulations, would the people inside (which could very well be you or me) be able to tell which computer their simulation was running in?

I could be wrong, but as of 2014, I don't think anyone knows the answer to that. So let's try to come up with an experiment that will determine the answer. (Later I will mention a potential problem with the proposed experiment, but let's describe the experiment first.) As part of the virtual reality simulation, we store a database describing the computer specs and the precise starting state of the simulation, and provide a way for the person in the simulation to query that database. While the real world person's brain is hooked up with the simulation, the database records every bit of information that is transferred from the person's brain into the simulation. Before killing or otherwise disconnecting the real world part of the person, we make sure that the virtual part of the person is completely comfortable with querying the database and is capable of rebuilding the computer and running the simulation inside the simulation itself. Then we disconnect the real world part of the person, and the virtual part of the person that remains proceeds to rebuild the simulation inside the simulation.

Note that in order for this to be possible, the amount of memory initially used by the simulation must be far smaller than the total amount of memory available. Otherwise, there would not be enough memory available for the person to rebuild the simulation inside, in the same way that virtual machines today must have less storage available than the computers they run on. We set up the simulation such that this is the case.

After disconnecting the real world part of the person, we clone the simulation onto many computers and resume the simulation on all of them. Initially, we resume the original simulation as is on all of the computers. However, after some time, on all computers except the original one, we introduce random changes into the simulation state that change the output but don't stop the simulation from running. Since the changes are random, they can affect the virtual reality world, the simulation running inside the virtual reality world, or both. Unless they produce exactly the same changes inside both, the virtual reality world and the simulation inside will start to diverge.

Before disconnecting the real world part of the person, the virtual part of the person is made sure to know this. Therefore, when they run the simulation inside the virtual reality world, it will either behave as they remember it or start to diverge from what the virtual person remembered happening. To the virtual person, these would mean the following:

If the simulation in the virtual reality world continues to behave exactly as the person remembers it, then the person knows that EITHER their simulation is running in the original computer (or maybe an alien's computer that happened to be doing the exact same thing), OR the simulation in the virtual reality world and the person's memory of what happened were both modified in the same way.

If the simulation in the virtual reality world diverges from how the person remembers it, then the person knows that EITHER their simulation is not running in the original computer, OR their memory is bad (which happens surprisingly often in the real world).

Unless events conspire against the person in the virtual reality world, I think they could know with reasonable certainty whether their simulation is running on the original computer. If it is not and the person "jumped" to a different computer, then it must have been possible to synchronize the computers so well that until they were purposely put out of sync, it would have been impossible for the virtual person to tell which computer their simulation was running in. (Remember that exactly the same data was loaded into all of the computers before they were resumed, and since the simulation is deterministic, every computer would make exactly the same sequence of changes to their stored data until the random changes are introduced.) This result would also raise the question of how the virtual person could predict which computer they would end up in. Even if the poor soul (which might be me or you) knew both general relativity and the standard model and could somehow predict the random changes that would be introduced into all of the computers, they could only predict in advance what each of the computers would do, not which of the computers they would personally find themself in. As far as I am aware, as of 2014 there is not even a widely acknowledged guess inside the scientific community of a way to predict the probability that the virtual person would find themself on each computer. (It could be that there is a 100% probability that they remain on the original computer, but as of now I don't think we have a way to experimentally determine that. It could also be that one or more of the assumptions I made at the beginning of the paper are wrong, but as I said, if they are wrong then the rest of the paper is completely irrelevant.)

There may be simpler ways to do this "experiment" such as destroying the original computer after cloning its data, so if the virtual person is still alive when the simulation resumes on a new computer then they know that they "jumped" computers. But hopefully by now you have noticed a very serious problem with this "experiment." Is it really an experiment?

In order to come up with a new rule for how the universe behaves, people use a process that works like this. First, you make a guess. (In this case, it's that people inside virtual reality simulations can't tell which computer their simulation is running in.) Then, you figure out the consequences of the guess. (In this case, it's that virtual people might find themselves having "jumped" to a different computer using the process above.) Then, you check whether those consequences are correct by comparing them to experience or experiment. (In this case, by putting yourself in a virtual reality simulation and seeing if you can "jump" computers.) If the predictions aren't consistent with the real world then the guess is wrong. (note: cite character of physical law; this is common knowledge but feynman does the best job at explaining it)

If it is possible for people to put themselves in virtual reality worlds, then for people who do that, this appears to be a completely valid experiment. But what about for everyone else? Normally, after people do an experiment, they announce the result to the rest of the world so that everyone else can know whether their guesses about the universe are wrong. People inside virtual reality worlds can announce their results too. But in this case, the rest of the world will see *every possible result* of the experiment (unless the virtual person somehow went into a nearly identical simulation running on alien computers, but let's not get into that) and be unable to assign a probability to each outcome! So is this really an experiment?

This also raises another question. Every potential experiment I have thought of to test whether people inside virtual reality simulations can tell which computer their simulation is running in has this same problem. Perhaps there is one that doesn't, and please tell me if you know of one. But if it is indeed the case that no experiment exists to directly answer this that doesn't have this problem, then it raises the question of whether this is a scientific question in the first place.

This question personally drives me nuts. When I think about science, I generally want to spend my time thinking about scientific questions and not unscientific ones. But if I think of a question and I can't figure out whether it's a scientific question, that drives me insane! So guess which science-related questions I spend the most time thinking about?

Below I will describe what happens when I try to answer whether that particular question is a scientific question. Either this is right and the universe is completely insane, or I made some obvious mistake that most other people would notice and I am fooling myself. It is much more likely that I am fooling myself. It is very easy for people to fool themselves. (note: cite character of physical law) I have done that in the past (note: cite gwep), and I wouldn't be at all surprised if I am doing it again. So if you have taken all the time to read this (you crazy person) and find a mistake or omission in my train of logic here, please let me know so I can get my sanity back. I don't expect anyone to do that, but I am posting this online in the hope that someone will anyway. So if you do that, then I owe you my gratitude. Thanks!

Let's start by assuming that this is not a scientific question. That would mean that this question really has nothing to do with how the universe behaves, and that it is impossible to experimentally prove someone wrong one way or the other about what the answer to the question is. That would mean that from a scientific perspective, it is perfectly valid for someone to believe that people inside virtual reality simulations can tell which computer their simulation is running in. It would also be perfectly valid for someone to believe that such people can't tell. Asking whether someone believes this would be like asking someone which interpretation of quantum mechanics they believe in. Since they all predict the same experimental results, all of these interpretations are valid.

So let's take someone with the perspective that people inside virtual reality simulations *cannot* tell which computer their simulation is running in. We ask them to consider the question of whether the universe we live in is running in a computer simulation, and ask whether that is a scientific question. If they answer yes, we leave them to ponder what sort of experiment would be able to determine that. (Good luck! And keep in mind that for all we know, civilizations capable of doing that may well have hypercomputers.) (note: cite wikipedia on hypercomputers) If they answer no, then either perspective ought to be valid.

So let's suppose they think that we cannot tell whether our universe is running in someone's computer simulation. If it is, then that someone may well be doing a variation of that "experiment" described above in which they copy a computer's current state onto multiple computers, resume the simulation, then introduce random changes on some of the computers. In fact, for all we know, every time they have to make a decision about what our universe does (such as whether a particle emits or absorbs some other particle), they might simply copy the simulation state onto multiple computers and compute every possible result. If there are infinite possible results, they use infinitely many computers. Their universe doesn't have to behave anything like ours.

So now I ask you the following question: from the perspective of someone simulating our universe on their computers like that, does there exist any question we have ever asked about how our universe behaves that is a scientific question? (I'm going to assume that from our perspective, people have asked scientific questions about our universe, since you would be an idiot not to believe that.) (note: what if they say this isn't a scientific question b/c it isn't from our perspective)

If you answer yes, then consider this. We are taking the perspective that if we simulate people in virtual reality simulations, it is not a scientific question for us to ask whether they can tell which computer they are in. But we are also taking the perspective that it is scientifically valid for people to believe that there may be someone simulating our universe on their computers, and that for them it *is* a scientific question to ask whether *we* can tell which computer we are in. (note: WHAT IS WRONG HERE? I what if the person we put in a simulation is us => whether question is scientific depends on whether we or someone else is in our own computer, and if it's us then whether question is scientific is time dependent; but they can still say that it's not a scientific question in that case)

If you answer no, then consider this. (note: this leads to parallel universes that aren't allowed to ask about other parallel universes; also makes sense)

(note: this may be overcomplicating it, maybe go back to older argument of if not scientific question, people inside simulation will do experiments anyway, and suppose we did have a theory that applied here)

(note: mention assumptions at beginning of paper again)
