Background

About a year and a half ago I started working on a terrible real-time strategy (RTS) game that lets you cheat with plausible deniability. (I think it is a terrible game because 100% of the gamers I've shown it to think it's a stupid toy, and quite frankly, I agree with them.) When I say that it lets you cheat with plausible deniability, I mean that if you play a multiplayer game and cheat, then even after the opponent watches the replay and compares it to what they saw while they played, it is impossible for them to prove that you cheated (short of hacking into the game or replay file). An example of cheating with plausible deniability is a map hack (seeing the entire map). An example of cheating *without* plausible deniability is giving yourself extra resources, since opponents can notice that when they watch the replay. But surely map hacks cannot be the only way to cheat with plausible deniability?

My stupid toy game (which you can download at https://github.com/ad510/plausible-deniability) lets you cheat using map hacks, but it also lets you cheat with plausible deniability using an entirely different class of techniques that take advantage of the fact that you don't really have to make up your mind about what your units do until another player sees them. For example, it lets you move your units along multiple paths when other players aren't looking, but the moment another player sees your unit moving along a path, the path they see is the one that is taken.

Now the weird thing about this game is that every time I add a new way to cheat, sometime later I'd be reading or listening to something about quantum mechanics and thinking that what they were describing about quantum mechanics sounds awfully similar to the feature I put in the game. (For example, the probability of a photon of light bouncing off a piece of glass depends on the thickness of the glass in a way that can only be reasonably explained if the photon didn't have to "decide" whether it bounced off the glass until it is seen.) And it isn't just me; multiple non-gamers have commented that what the game does sounds very similar to quantum mechanics, even when I explained the game solely in terms of cheating and not in terms of physics.

Relatively recently, I think I've figured out what the connection is. Early in the history of discovering quantum mechanics, people represented quantum states using obtuse notations involving either matrices or wave equations. Some time later, Richard Feynman noticed another way to represent a single way a quantum mechanical event could have happened. These are now called Feynman diagrams, and they look like this:

(note: insert feynman diagram)

This is read left to right, and indicates that there are 2 electrons, and one of them emits a photon.

Now of course the particles that you draw on a Feynman diagram don't have to be ones from nature. Here's another Feynman diagram:

(note: insert same Feynman diagram)

This one indicates that there are 2 buildings, and one of them makes a worker.

Since we are now in the 21st century, we now have more high tech ways of representing this event. One of them is the replay of an RTS game. For example, the above Feynman diagram would be represented in an RTS replay by displaying a pictures of 2 buildings, then animating a worker walking out of one of them.

In fact, I think it is reasonable to say that any RTS replay can have a corresponding Feynman diagram drawn for it with practically no loss of information except for one of the spatial dimensions, and any Feynman diagram can respectively be represented in a (possibly rather strange-looking) RTS replay with no loss of information at all.

Of course, Feynman diagrams alone don't make for a complete scientific theory because there is no way to make predictions with them without using additional techniques. In a similar way, playing RTS games isn't doing physics. But it is possible to describe a lot of cool tricks that quantum mechanics plays on us in terms of Feynman diagrams (such as showing multiple ways that the same event could have happened), and what I suspect I am finding is that a lot of cool tricks that quantum mechanics plays on us can also be played by RTS players on other RTS players. Of course many of the details would be different in an RTS game compared to real life (such as particle/unit types and what they're allowed to do), but the basic ideas behind the tricks seem to be the same.

I could go on about that, but that's not what this paper is about. What this paper is about is that I'm having trouble reconciling what I think measurement means in quantum mechanics (described from the perspective of an RTS game) with the belief that asking "who am I" isn't a scientific question. (note: that isn't quite the problem, need to update this section) Most likely I am making a mistake somewhere, so I am writing my thoughts down to help me try to figure out what I am doing wrong. I could be making a mistake in at least one of several places:

- I am misunderstanding what measurement means in quantum mechanics. (This is the most likely situation, since it is often hard to follow physicists' explanations and it is very easy to misinterpret something. I've done that before.)
- My understanding of what measurement means in quantum mechanics is actually consistent with the belief that "who am I" is not be a scientific question.
- Asking "who am I" should be considered a scientific question. (If this is true, then the broad consensus of the scientific community would be wrong about this and it would be a big deal. Therefore I think this is very unlikely.)

First, I will describe my (likely flawed) understanding of what measurement is in quantum mechanics. Unfortunately I can't justify it much because it is simply my interpretation of what I read about quantum mechanics, but by writing it down I can at least check that it is self-consistent. Then, I will describe why I think it is inconsistent with believing that "who am I" is not a scientific question. Finally, I'll do some wild-eyed speculation about some possible consequences of considering "who am I" to be a scientific question, even though I probably made a terrible mistake long before reaching that point.

What I Think Measurement Means In Quantum Mechanics

I'll use the terms "RTS game" and "RTS replay" in specific ways, so I better clarify what I mean by them. In an RTS game, I assume that players are allowed to cheat with plausible deniability (as described at the beginning of the "Background" section), since after all they can get away with it without other players being able to prove that they did it. A replay shows one way that the game could have taken place that is consistent with all players' views of what happened, but does not show any cheating.

Suppose there is an RTS game with one player running in free build mode with perfect information (i.e., a map hack). It is three-dimensional, has very strange unit types with very strange rules about what they are allowed to do (for example they can move as fast or slow as they want and the player can make as many particles as desired as long as certain rules are followed), and space and time behave kind of funny. Also, the player never has to make up their mind about what their units did and can do things like keep track of multiple possibilities of what might be happening. Now it turns out that some of these units are the particles that we are made out of, and this "game" is being played in our universe! So what we perceive is essentially a replay of what the "units" (particles) in our body do during our lifetime. Now we can look out into rest of the world and imagine that we are living in part of a beautiful replay. But this "replay" that we imagine is just a figment of our imaginations, and what is really happening is . . . well, let's just say it's too damn awesome for me to be able to describe in words. Maybe you should go play my terrible RTS game.

As I said, I can't really justify that this interpretation of quantum mechanics is accurate. In fact, as is, I don't think that interpretation can possibly be correct. If you didn't see any problem with it, read that paragraph again and see if you can spot a problem.

The Problem

(note: explain better that if possible to measure anything, then can say something about which versions of replay could or could not have happened, so possible to figure out who you are)

The problem with this interpretation is that it doesn't provide a satisfactory way (note: I don't think I explain this) for us to tell which particles are part of our body, or, in other words, who we are. That is a problem because according to this interpretation, who we are determines what each of us can know about the universe.

Or maybe that isn't a problem because who we are isn't a scientific question, so it isn't a problem that this interpretation doesn't give a satisfactory way to answer it. But let's play along with this train of thought for now and come back to that later.

How do we go about figuring out who each of us is? The particles in our bodies might not have to make up their minds right away about what they're doing, but obviously we have some sort of idea about what they (and the rest of the universe) are doing. So first, we collect together what we know about what just happened. Based on what we know, we can figure out something about which version of the replay of us happened. We'll know more about some parts of that "replay" than others. So we take the part of the replay that we know best and call that collection of particles "myself."

Now I think that is roughly how the process works (I could be wrong), but even if we think we know who we are right now, that doesn't give us a way to predict who we will be in the future. It might not be clear what I mean by that, so let's give an example. The right half of your brain processes what you see to the left, and the left half of your brain processes what you see to the right. (http://www.sumanasinc.com/webcontent/animations/content/visualpathways.html slide 8, but I can cite BISC 230) For most people, the left half of the brain also handles speech production. The 2 halves of your brain are connected by this bundle of neurons called the corpus callopsum. Now a few unlucky people have had surgeries that severed their corpus callopsum, and we've done experiments on them and determined that they couldn't verbally tell us what they see in their left visual field. (But they could draw it with their left hand, because the right half of the brain controls the left half of the body.)

So let's say we sever your corpus callopsum. If "you" end up on the right side of your brain, from your perspective you will be able to see what's happening to your left but you won't be able to tell anyone. If "you" end up on the left side of your brain, from your perpective you won't be able to see what's happening to your left but you'll know how to talk. Before we sever your corpus callopsum, how can you figure out the probabilities that you'll end up with each of these perspectives?

Now suppose instead of just severing your corpus callopsum, we knock you out, cut off one of your brain halves entirely and incinerate it, then restore your consciousness. Would the probabilities that you'll end up on each half of your brain be different then?

There is a huge class of questions along these lines, but perhaps we should return now to a point mentioned earlier, which is are these questions (which are really just different ways of asking "who am I") scientific questions? After all, if a question can't be answered by experiment, then it isn't a scientific question. And if you ask people "who are you," you will get a different answer from everyone you ask, making it rather difficult (to say the least) to come up with an experiment to answer this question with reproducible results.

Speaking of which, how do we go about measuring the results of experiments?

Knowing the result of an experiment requires being able to distinguish that some possibilities happened but that others did not. (note: brain experiment above didn't really emphasize this vs earlier one) However, in quantum mechanics, anything you do is in theory reversible, so even if you think you got a certain result, someone else might not be able to tell. But what you can do is go around and ask a bunch of people what they thought the result of the experiment was, and what everyone agrees on is considered the agreed upon result of the experiment.

In other words, this is essentially the same process that we use to figure out which version of the replay of us happened. And if that's correct, then it seems to imply that in quantum mechanics, every single experiment we've ever done is really just answering a form of the question "who am I?"

Now if *that* is correct, then if "who am I" isn't considered a scientific question, then every single question we've asked about the universe can't be scientific questions either. Which seems to imply that unless I made a terrible mistake somewhere (which I almost definitely did), the question "who am I" ought to be considered a scientific question.

My understanding is that quantum mechanics in its purest form does not really predict probabilities that different results will happen, but rather outputs "amplitudes" (which are really just arrows) for every possible event that could happen in the future. So what we do is pick certain events that we think are representative of the possible final results of the experiment, and use an ugly (or perhaps beautiful) hack to turn the amplitudes for these results into probabilities. This has worked well for every small scale experiment we've ever been able to reproduce, but I don't think it's helpful in determining who we are and who we will be in the future.

General relativity can't even represent the idea of having multiple possibilities that might occur in the future, so I don't think it will be much help either.

And if there's a scientific question that both quantum mechanics and general relativity are unable to answer, then...

Before we get into that, I should reiterate that since no scientist seems to believe it, I am almost definitely fooling myself with the idea that "who am I" should be considered a scientific question. And it drive me completely nuts that I can't trust my intuition anymore with something as basic as how the universe works. It doesn't really help that the train of thought above is rather informal and relies on an understanding of measurement in quantum mechanics that is probably a misinterpretation of what physicists say. However, what I find is that if the problem is worded in a different way that isn't dependent on that interpretation of measurement in quantum mechanics, then believing that "who am I" isn't a scientific question seems to run into more serious issues.