Background

About a year and a half ago I started working on a terrible real-time strategy (RTS) game that lets you cheat with plausible deniability. (I think it is a terrible game because 100% of the gamers I've shown it to think it's a stupid toy, and quite frankly, I agree with them.) When I say that it lets you cheat with plausible deniability, I mean that if you play a multiplayer game and cheat, then even after the opponent watches the replay and compares it to what they saw while they played, it is impossible for them to prove that you cheated (short of hacking into the game or replay file). An example of cheating with plausible deniability is a map hack (seeing the entire map). An example of cheating *without* plausible deniability is giving yourself extra resources, since opponents can notice that when they watch the replay. But surely map hacks cannot be the only way to cheat with plausible deniability?

My stupid toy game (which you can download at https://github.com/ad510/plausible-deniability) lets you cheat using map hacks, but it also lets you cheat with plausible deniability using an entirely different class of techniques that take advantage of the fact that you don't really have to make up your mind about what your units do until another player sees them. For example, it lets you move your units along multiple paths when other players aren't looking, but the moment another player sees your unit moving along a path, the path they see is the one that is taken.

Now the weird thing about this game is that every time I add a new way to cheat, sometime later I'd be reading or listening to something about quantum mechanics and thinking that what they were describing about quantum mechanics sounds awfully similar to the feature I put in the game. (For example, the probability of a photon of light bouncing off a piece of glass depends on the thickness of the glass in a way that can only be reasonably explained if the photon didn't have to "decide" whether it bounced off the glass until it is seen.) And it isn't just me; multiple non-gamers have commented that what the game does sounds very similar to quantum mechanics, even when I explained the game solely in terms of cheating and not in terms of physics.

Relatively recently, I think I've figured out what the connection is. Early in the history of discovering quantum mechanics, people represented quantum states using obtuse notations involving either matrices or wave equations. Some time later, Richard Feynman noticed another way to represent a single way a quantum mechanical event could have happened. These are now called Feynman diagrams, and they look like this:

(note: insert feynman diagram)

This is read left to right, and indicates that there are 2 electrons, and one of them emits a photon.

Now of course the particles that you draw on a Feynman diagram don't have to be ones from nature. Here's another Feynman diagram:

(note: insert same Feynman diagram)

This one indicates that there are 2 buildings, and one of them makes a worker.

Since we are now in the 21st century, we now have more high tech ways of representing this event. One of them is the replay of an RTS game. For example, the above Feynman diagram would be represented in an RTS replay by displaying a pictures of 2 buildings, then animating a worker walking out of one of them.

In fact, I think it is reasonable to say that any RTS replay can have a corresponding Feynman diagram drawn for it with practically no loss of information except for one of the spatial dimensions, and any Feynman diagram can respectively be represented in a (possibly rather strange-looking) RTS replay with no loss of information at all.

Of course, Feynman diagrams alone don't make for a complete scientific theory because there is no way to make predictions with them without using additional techniques. In a similar way, playing RTS games isn't doing physics. But it is possible to describe a lot of cool tricks that quantum mechanics plays on us in terms of Feynman diagrams (such as showing multiple ways that the same event could have happened), and what I suspect I am finding is that a lot of cool tricks that quantum mechanics plays on us can also be played by RTS players on other RTS players. Of course many of the details would be different in an RTS game compared to real life (such as particle/unit types and what they're allowed to do), but the basic ideas behind the tricks seem to be the same.

I could go on about that, but that's not what this paper is about. What this paper is about is that I'm having trouble reconciling what I think measurement means in quantum mechanics (described from the perspective of an RTS game) with the belief that asking "who am I" isn't a scientific question. (note: that isn't quite the problem, need to update this section) Most likely I am making a mistake somewhere, so I am writing my thoughts down to help me try to figure out what I am doing wrong. I could be making a mistake in at least one of several places:

- I am misunderstanding what measurement means in quantum mechanics. (This is the most likely situation, since it is often hard to follow physicists' explanations and it is very easy to misinterpret something. I've done that before.)
- My understanding of what measurement means in quantum mechanics is actually consistent with the belief that "who am I" is not be a scientific question.
- Asking "who am I" should be considered a scientific question. (If this is true, then the broad consensus of the scientific community would be wrong about this and it would be a big deal. Therefore I think this is very unlikely.)

First, I will describe my (likely flawed) understanding of what measurement is in quantum mechanics. Unfortunately I can't justify it much because it is simply my interpretation of what I read about quantum mechanics, but by writing it down I can at least check that it is self-consistent. Then, I will describe why I think it is inconsistent with believing that "who am I" is not a scientific question. Finally, I'll do some wild-eyed speculation about some possible consequences of considering "who am I" to be a scientific question, even though I probably made a terrible mistake long before reaching that point.

What I Think Measurement Means In Quantum Mechanics

I'll use the terms "RTS game" and "RTS replay" in specific ways, so I better clarify what I mean by them. In an RTS game, I assume that players are allowed to cheat with plausible deniability (as described at the beginning of the "Background" section), since after all they can get away with it without other players being able to prove that they did it. A replay shows one way that the game could have taken place that is consistent with all players' views of what happened, but does not show any cheating.

Suppose there is an RTS game with one player running in free build mode with perfect information (i.e., a map hack). It is three-dimensional, has very strange unit types with very strange rules about what they are allowed to do (for example they can move as fast or slow as they want and the player can make as many particles as desired as long as certain rules are followed), and space and time behave kind of funny. Also, the player never has to make up their mind about what their units did and can do things like keep track of multiple possibilities of what might be happening. Now it turns out that some of these units are the particles that we are made out of, and this "game" is being played in our universe! So what we perceive is essentially a replay of what the "units" (particles) in our body do during our lifetime. Now we can look out into rest of the world and imagine that we are living in part of a beautiful replay. But this "replay" that we imagine is just a figment of our imaginations, and what is really happening is . . . well, let's just say it's too damn awesome for me to be able to describe in words. Maybe you should go play my terrible RTS game.

As I said, I can't really justify that this interpretation of quantum mechanics is accurate. If you see anything wrong with it, please let me know, and I'll try to do the same.

The Problem

I hope you did see a problem with it. As is, I don't think that interpretation can possibly be correct. If you didn't see the problem, read that section and see if you can spot it.

The problem with this interpretation is that it doesn't adequately handle the case where some particles in your body cheat along with other particles in your body while collectively hiding that they cheated from the rest of your body. In the game, the player should be allowed to do this because all of the units belong to that one player. However, if the player did so, tne rest of your body wouldn't be able to tell what the part of your body that cheated did, and wouldn't be able to resolve a unique replay of what happened in your entire body. So your body couldn't have been your "entire" body, and it must have been the part that didn't cheat on the rest of your body. But perhaps part of that part of your body cheated as well. By following this argument, you'd reach the conclusion that "you" can only be a single particle. However, in life we don't experience that to be the case.

I suppose that was rather densely worded, so let's try a real life example. Take any 2 electrons in your brain. They exchange a photon. Or maybe they didn't. But how do you know whether they actually did exchange a photon? If those 2 electrons in your brain were really part of "you," then you ought to know whether or not they exchanged a photon. If they are part of you, then these 2 electrons wouldn't know whether any other pair of electrons exchanged photons, so the rest of your brain couldn't be part of "you." So maybe they weren't part of you after all. But then if you suppose that any other 2 electrons are part of "you," then you run into the same problem with the rest of your brain. And how do you know whether the photon that one electron in your brain emitted is the same as the one that the other electron absorbed? For all you know, maybe the emitted photon went off into space somewhere and the absorbed photon was actually a cosmic ray from a supernova. The photon couldn't have been part of "you" either. So how do you know the 2 electrons in your brain communicated in your brain in the first place?

The easy way around this is to assume that our identities are really those of individual particles. But if that's the case, then how do we get to experience the world the way we do?

In order to follow the scientific method, we need to be able to do experiments. To do experiments, we need to be able to measure things. However, what you get to measure depends on who you are. (note: I forgot how I got from here to all measurement is a form of asking "who am I," should think back to RTS games)