Putting someone in virtual reality

For the last several decades, computing power has essentially grown at an exponential rate, and it always looked as if in about 10 years into the future we would run into some seemingly unsurmountable problem that would prevent computing power from significantly increasing beyond that. But each time that prediction was made, sometime later people would find a solution to that! So people have tried to predict how long it would take until computers become as smart as every human on earth if this trend continued, making a ton of dubious assumptions in the process, but most people who've done that ended up with a number around a timeframe from about 2020 to 2060. [http://library.fora.tv/2012/10/14/Stuart_Armstrong_How_Were_Predicting_AI at 10:15] That's probably within my lifetime! So it's fun to speculate about what these computers from around 2060 would be capable of. Even if those predictions are wrong and it takes much longer for computers to become that smart, it's fun to speculate about what really powerful computers would be capable of anyway.

Virtual reality simulations are already pretty good these days. I'd imagine that virtual reality simulations around 2060 would be *really* good, possibly so good that to a virtual person living in one, it would look pretty convincingly like a real universe. Now the simulation doesn't have to be programmed to behave anything like our universe. Our universe behaves with some sort of combination of general relativity and the standard model, but the simulation doesn't have to behave that way and people in the future could program it to behave any way they wanted. That said, if we wanted to predict what the simulation would do, we could still in theory measure the states that all of the particles in the computer were in, and use the standard model and general relativity (or even just look at the computer program and the hardware specs) to get a pretty damn good idea of how the simulation would behave. So no surprises there.

But still, wouldn't it be fun to live in one of these simulations that doesn't have to behave like our universe? Perhaps it could be done like this. People have already done experiments where they put implants into rat brains and had them communicate with each other. [http://www.guardian.co.uk/science/2013/feb/28/brains-rats-connected-share-information] In 2060, it wouldn't be too much of a stretch to suppose that people could do this with human brains as well [add updated link], and that there could be so much bandwidth transfer between the brains that people hooked up this way would feel like a single person. After all, single celled organisms came before multicellular organisms, and you can think of multicellular organisms such as us as a bunch of single-celled organisms hooked up in such a way that they're dependent on each other. Despite that, we each still feel like a single person. So how would it feel if we hooked up multiple people's brains together? Better yet, what if we hooked up one of our brains to the brain of someone in a computer simulation? Would we collectively feel like a single person then?

We won't know that until we actually try it. Right now we can't do that so we don't know the answer. I think it is reasonable to assume that the answer is yes, and the rest of my thought process assumes that the answer is yes too. If the answer is no then the rest of this writeup is completely irrelevant. I guess we'll find out in the not too distant future!

So let's say someone does that and they are now a single person that lives in both the real world and a virtual reality world. And then the part of the person living in the real world gets into a tragic accident and gets their brain blasted into a million pieces, and no more nondeterministic data (such as what the real world side of the person is thinking) is fed into the simulation. How unfortunate. But now they completely live in a virtual reality world that doesn't have to behave anything like our own! How awesome is that? Of course, the part of the person that was in the real world also happened to program the virtual reality simulation, and they transferred their knowledge to the virtual reality part of their brain when they got hooked up. So the person now in the virtual reality can still predict what will happen to them in terms of general relativity and the standard model, so in a sense they still really live in our universe.

By the way, I made another assumption there, which is that when the real world part of the brain got blasted into a million pieces, the person still lived on in the virtual reality world instead of just dying. I think this is a realistic assumption because people have done surgeries where they removed half of someone's brain and they still lived on OK. [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hemispherectomy] If this turns out not to hold true with part of the brain in the real world and part of the brain in a virtual reality world, then the rest of this writeup is completely irrelevant. I hope we'll find out about that in the not too distant future as well!

If these assumptions are correct, we now succeeded in getting someone from living completely in the real world to living to the greatest extent possible in a virtual reality world. If our technology progresses fast enough, that person may very well be you or me! And even though that person knows that they really live in a bigger universe that follows general relativity and the standard model, the virtual reality simulation sure *feels* convincing.

The problem

Now there's something that you can do with virtual reality simulations that I find really fascinating. I don't know how computers will work in 2060, but computers right now have dedicated places where they store their current state, such as memory and hard disks. It's possible to hibernate the computer so that its current state is frozen onto disk, copy the data on the disk to a second computer with the same specs, then start up both computers. If both computers operate correctly and the simulation is completely deterministic, then when the simulation resumes, it will behave the same way on both computers.

So suppose we do the following in our 2060-era hypothetical. In the virtual reality world, we put a clock on the wall. After disconnecting the real world part of the person, we copy the simulation to the second computer, then wait until the clock in the virtual world hits a certain time communicated in advance to the person inside (say, 12:00 midnight). From the time that we copy the simulation to the second computer until 12:00 midnight in the virtual world, both computers run the same deterministic simulation. Then at that moment the simulated clock hits 12:00 midnight, we destroy the computer with the original copy of the simulation, but leave the simulation running in the second computer.

From the perspective of the person we put in the simulation, there are 2 obvious possibilities that could happen when the clock strikes 12. If the person's identity is somehow tied to which physical computer he or she is in, then he or she "dies" and won't be able to perceive anything after that moment. On the other hand, if the person's identity is somehow tied to which simulation he or she is in in a way that has nothing to do with which computer is running it, then there is a possibility that he or she continues to "live on" because the same simulation is still running in the second computer.

If we do this and the person in the simulation "dies," then this doesn't raise any issues with our understanding of the universe. But the reason that I find this question so fascinating is the possibility that such people might "live on" in the second computer.

Suppose we do things a little differently, and we copy the simulation state into 2 other computers (instead of just 1) before destroying the original computer. If the person still finds that he/she is still alive after the virtual clock passes 12 midnight, then the person will know that he/she is in one of the two remaining computers, but will not know which one they're in because both computers are running the same simulation. So at this point, we give the person a way to tell which computer they're in by flashing a color in the virtual world, flashing red in one computer and green in the other. (The choice of which computer flashes which color can be delayed as long as possible to ensure that both computers have the same simulation state until that point.) If the plan to do this is communicated in advance to the person in the simulation, then this raises a new question for that person: how can he/she predict the probabilities of seeing a red flash or a green flash before it occurs?

Of course, he/she could predict that there's a 50% chance of seeing a red flash and a 50% chance of seeing a green one, but just because there's two possibilities doesn't necessarily mean that each possibility has a 50% chance of occurring. For example, if you consider the possibilities of whether or not you'll be struck by lightning within the next 10 seconds, it is far more likely that you will not be struck by lightning.

So, then, how should the person predict the probability of seeing a red or green flash? The most fundamental physics theories we know of today are general relativity, which describes physics at large scales, and the standard model of particle physics, which describes physics at small scales. Both theories have been experimentally tested to amazing precision, and the result of every experiment we've ever performed can be explained in terms of these theories. But if it is possible for people to go into computer simulations (a very big if, of course), then even if the poor souls know both theories and could somehow calculate in real-time how the individual subatomic particles in the computers would behave, they still could only predict in advance what each of the computers would do, not which of the computers they would personally find themselves in. So if it turns out that the person "survives" when the original computer is destroyed, our state-of-the-art physics theories would provide no guidance on predicting the probabilities of seeing a red or green flash, since this would require predicting which computer his or her identity "jumps" to.

As far as I am aware, as of 2015 there is not even a widely acknowledged guess inside the scientific community of what the outcome of this experiment would be from the perspective of the person in the simulation. Isn't that crazy? That sounds like it can't possibly be correct, doesn't it? But hopefully by now you have noticed a very serious problem with this "experiment." Is it really an experiment?

Is this a scientific question?

In order to come up with a new rule for how the universe behaves, people use a process that works like this. First, you make a guess. (In this case, it's that people inside virtual reality simulations can "jump" between computers that run the same simulation.) Then, you figure out the consequences of the guess. (In this case, it's that people who go in virtual reality simulations can "survive" in a second computer if the original computer they go in is destroyed.) Then, you check whether those consequences are correct by comparing them to experience or experiment. (In this case, by putting yourself in a virtual reality simulation, having some friends copy the simulation to a second computer and destroy the original computer, and seeing if you survive when this happens.) If the predictions aren't consistent with the real world then the guess is wrong. [character of physical law; this is common knowledge but feynman does the best job at explaining it]

If it is possible for people to put themselves in virtual reality worlds, then for people who do that, this appears to be a completely valid experiment. But what about for everyone else? Normally, after people do an experiment, they announce the result to the rest of the world so that everyone else can know whether their guesses about the universe are wrong. People inside virtual reality worlds can announce their results too. But in this case, the rest of the world will see *every possible result* of the experiment (unless the virtual person somehow went into an identical simulation running on alien computers, but let's not get into that) and be unable to assign a probability to each outcome! So is this really an experiment?

This also raises another question. Every potential experiment I have thought of to test whether people inside virtual reality simulations can "jump" between computers has this same problem. Perhaps there is one that doesn't, and please tell me if you know of one. But if it is indeed the case that no experiment exists to directly answer this that doesn't have this problem, then it raises the question of whether this is a scientific question in the first place. (By scientific question, I mean a question that can be tested by experiment.)

There is a similar issue with the possibility of putting a person's identity in a virtual reality simulation. If we hook up someone's brain with a simulated person's brain then blow up the real world brain, we could try to figure out whether the person felt like they went from the real world to a virtual world by questioning the simulated person. But does questioning the simulated person count as measuring the result of an experiment, or more generally, is it scientific to ask whether it is possible for real world people to go into virtual reality worlds?

The question of whether it's scientific to think about this stuff personally drives me nuts. When I think about science, I want to spend my time thinking about scientific questions and not unscientific ones. But if I think of a question and I can't figure out whether it's scientific, that drives me insane! So guess which science-related questions I spend the most time thinking about?

Below I will describe what happens when I try to answer whether these particular questions are scientific questions (i.e. ones that can be tested by experiment). Either this is right and the universe is completely insane, or I made some obvious mistake that most other people would notice and I am fooling myself. It is much more likely that I am fooling myself. In the words of Richard Feynman, "you are the easiest person to fool," [surely you're joking] and I wouldn't be at all surprised if that's what I'm doing here. So if you have taken all the time to read this (you crazy person) and find a mistake or omission in my train of logic here, please let me know [link] so I can get my sanity back. I don't expect anyone to do that, but I am posting this online in the hope that someone will anyway. So if you do that, then I owe you my gratitude. Thanks!

If this isn't scientific, what would that really mean?

There are two separate questions we're considering here: whether it's possible for real world people to go into virtual reality worlds, and whether people inside virtual reality simulations can "jump" between computers that run the same simulation. Up until now, we've implicitly assumed that these questions are scientific so that we could discuss possible experimental outcomes. So now let's do the opposite and suppose that these are *not* scientific questions, and try to understand what that would really mean. By definition, that would mean that these questions really have nothing to do with how the universe behaves, and that it is impossible to experimentally prove someone wrong one way or the other about what the answers to these questions are. In other words, that would mean that from a scientific perspective, it is perfectly valid for someone to believe (for the sake of interpretation) any of the following statements:

- It IS NOT possible for real world people to go into virtual reality worlds, and simulated people CANNOT "jump" between computers that run the same simulation.
- It IS NOT possible for real world people to go into virtual reality worlds, and simulated people CAN "jump" between computers that run the same simulation.
- It IS possible for real world people to go into virtual reality worlds, and after they do so they CANNOT "jump" between computers that run the same simulation.
- It IS possible for real world people to go into virtual reality worlds, and after they do so they CAN "jump" between computers that run the same simulation.

Asking someone which of these statements they believe would be like asking which of the various interpretations of quantum mechanics [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Interpretations_of_quantum_mechanics] they believe in. Since we're assuming they all predict the same experimental results, all of these interpretations would be valid.

[pop culture or political example in addition to/instead of interpretations of quantum mechanics?]
[instead of "valid", use synonym for "impossible to prove wrong" such as "unfalsifiable"?]
[if use of "valid" confuses people who don't know what I mean by interpretations of quantum mechanics, say philosophers come up with names of these possibilities & physicists haven't stopped them b/c they haven't shown experimental results they imply, so people assume which you believe is a matter of opinion]

So now we wait until the 2060s and try to put you from the real world into a virtual reality world using the procedure described previously. But suppose that before we do so, we tell you something very special. Not only do we explain to you how the simulation is programmed to behave, but we also teach you the theory of everything [wikipedia link], the hypothetical physics theory that can predict to the maximum extent possible the outcome of any experiment that can possibly be performed. As of today, we do not know what the theory of everything is, but we can use the assumptions we've made to infer possible properties it might have. For example, since we're assuming that the concept of a probability of virtual people "jumping" between computers is unscientific, we can assume that the theory of everything doesn't have to answer that question.

If we accept the interpretation that you cannot go into a virtual reality world, then at this point you die a happy person, having lived out your life to its fullest (hopefully). But if we instead accept the also-valid interpretation that you *can* go into a virtual reality world, then you get to experience what it's like to live in a computer simulation (lucky you)! Let's accept the interpretation that you *can* go into the virtual reality world.

At this point we do that thing where we copy the simulation onto 2 more computers, blow up the first (original) computer, and flash red in the second computer and green in the third computer. Since we're assuming that it's unscientific to ask whether or not people in simulations can "jump" between computers, it should be possible for us to hold logical beliefs if we accept either interpretation.

If we accept the interpretation that people in simulations *cannot* jump between computers, then it'd mean that you'll die when we blow up the first computer, and that the virtual people in the second and third computers are different people that happen to inherit your memories. If you can somehow explain how the copies of you can tell that they're copies even though the bits in computer memory representing their thoughts start out the same as yours, I suppose that's a perfectly logical thing to believe.

[I'm in the 1st/2nd/3rd computer, so I will die or see a red/green flash]

If we instead accept the also-valid interpretation that people in simulations *can* jump between computers, then it'd mean that you won't die when the first computer blows up, and that you're either going to see a red flash (if you "jump" to the second computer) or a green flash (if you "jump" to the third computer). For those of us watching the computers from outside, that's fine because we see both possibilities. But what are you supposed to think? Even though we taught you the theory of everything, you can't use that to calculate the probability of yourself seeing a red or green flash because we're assuming such a question is unscientific. So you think, "Fine! Maybe the theory of everything doesn't apply here!" And if you're a good scientist, you make your own hypothesis of whether you'll see a red or green flash, and after the flash occurs you continue life as normal.

[Damn it! The theory of everything won't tell me the chances of seeing a red or green flash!]

Hopefully you see at this point that something is not quite right if you find yourself having to make a hypothesis about something that the theory of everything won't answer, but let's continue the hypothetical.

So we successfully messed with your head once. Do you think we're going to stop there? Of course not! We're going to keep messing with your head in the craziest ways we can think of! So the next time you get in a romantic relationship with someone, we'll copy your simulation onto another computer, and in one computer your partner decides to marry you and in the other computer your partner breaks up. And the next time you have a baby, we'll copy your simulation onto another computer, and in one computer your baby grows into a successful adult and in the other computer your baby is stillborn. And so on.

[baby goes waa vs mom goes waa]

Those of us running the simulations don't care, since we see all the parallel versions of you that we make. But now you're starting to get pretty frustrated that the theory of everything is failing you so often. So the scientist in you decides to start putting your observations together to build a theory that predicts the probability of you seeing a red of green flash, or of your baby being stillborn, and so on, and you refine it as we keep splitting off new versions of you. If you're really successful, perhaps you even succeed in making a new theory of everything that explains everything that happens in this crazy parallel universe you're in. At which point you live happily ever after. (Of course, since you assume that the concept of a probability of virtual people "jumping" between computers is unscientific, your new theory of everything doesn't answer that question in the general case.)

Hopefully you think that something is definitely not right if you need *two* theories of everything to be able to predict everything that can happen in the universe of universes (which some people call the "multiverse"), but let's continue the hypothetical.

Now that you live happily ever after in a computer simulation, you suddenly have a great idea! Assuming that there's enough energy in the visible universe to be able to do this, you decide to use the virtual computers you've built to program a new virtual reality simulation that doesn't behave anything like the one you're in, and use the virtual brain-connecting cables you've built to put yourself in your new simulation, so that you can live inside a simulation *inside a simulation*! (Since we're assuming that whether you can do that is unscientific, we accept the interpretation that you indeed can.) But after you do this, some mischievous virtual people decide to copy your simulation-in-a-simulation onto 2 new virtual computers that make the simulation do slightly different things, and blow up your original virtual computer. Since we're assuming that the question of whether you "jump" to the one of the other computers is unscientific, we accept the interpretation that you in fact do. And since your new theory of everything only applied when you lived in a simulation, not a simulation-in-a-simulation, now you have to come up with a *third* theory of everything!

[Damn it! Not again!]

See what's happening here? If we consider it unscientific to ask whether we can go in virtual reality simulations in such a way that we can "jump" between computers running the same simulation, then it would mean that candidate theories of everything won't have to answer that question and all the possible interpretations of that question would be valid. But then someone who accepts the interpretation that we *can* go in virtual reality simulations in such a way that we *can* jump between computers would be forced to accept (due to those same limitations that we allowed in the theory of everything) that not only do we live in a "multiverse" of potentially many different parallel universes with separate laws of physics, but that it's possible for us to travel between universes at will and be forced to come up with new laws of physics each time we do so.

Now I don't know about you, but regardless of whatever multiverse hype has been going on lately, I think believing in such a "multiverse" would be completely antithetical to what science is about. The central motivation behind science is that the world we live in is fundamentally predictable, and to the extent that it's predictable we can and will try to predict what'll happen in it to help us make the world a better place. Saying that there are multiple universes we can travel between and that we shouldn't try to predict the other universes would be giving up on this idea, even if people who go to these other "universes" and measure what happens in them can't unambiguously tell us what the outcome was.

So if it is completely antithetical to science to believe that a "multiverse" is a valid interpretation of physics, then what is the alternative? [tree diagram?] The alternative would be to accept that the following questions are within the realm of science:

1. Is it possible for us to put ourselves in virtual reality simulations?
2. If so, how can we predict the probability of "jumping" between computers (which may or may not be nonzero)?

Accepting that these questions are scientific would mean that any candidate theory of everything would have to answer them, closing off the loophole where someone could find themselves having to predict something that the theory of everything can't predict. On the other hand, this would mean that the scientific community on Earth can never know for sure that the answers that the theory of everything gives to these questions are correct, since anyone able to experimentally check them would never be able to unambiguously tell the outcome they observe to the rest of us. So here's what it comes down to: should we consider the 2 questions above to be scientific and expand the definition of experiments to include ones where some observers see a single outcome but all other observers see all possible outcomes, or should we consider the questions above to be unscientific and accept that what counts as an experiment depends on who is observing the outcome?

I don't know about you, but unbelievable as it sounds, I think the better option by far is to accept that the 2 questions above are scientific. It has long been the case that something is considered an experiment if it is possible for someone to measure the outcome in theory, even if we ourselves choose not to perform the experiment or people who perform it cannot tell us the result. For example, the question of what happens inside a black hole is considered a major unsolved problem in physics, even though it might be physically impossible (depending on what the theory of quantum gravity says about it) for people who never go inside a black hole to measure what happens there. And let's not lose sight of the bigger picture. If our technology progresses fast enough, putting ourselves in virtual reality worlds might be possible within our lifetimes! Don't we owe ourselves at least an educated guess of what would happen to us if we choose to do that?

[hmm, maybe I preferred it w/o this extra discussion]

If the answer to #1 is no *or* the answer to #2 is that we can never "jump" between computers, then the theory of everything remains synonymous with the theory of quantum gravity. If the answer to #1 is yes *and* the answer to #2 is nonzero, then we have work cut out for us.

Please tell me I made a mistake somewhere. I'd be really surprised if I'm the first person to think of this.

If this is scientific, then what else is?

I'm still probably fooling myself, but if I'm not then we have an obligation to do wild-eyed speculation about the consequences (see wording in scientific question3.4 and answer1)
key thing is non-experimenters seeing every result
brain splitting
quantum mechanics

(continued in answer1.1.txt)
