This isn't about digital physics

There is a field of study called "digital physics" that concerns itself with the possibility that we might be living in a computer simulation.

So far, we do not have any experimental evidence of that being the case. So that's not what this writeup is about. Instead, this writeup is about what might happen to us if we *put* ourselves in a computer simulation. On the surface, that seems like a very simple question to answer: just look at the code that the computer is running! But on closer examination, I think there are some very practical aspects to this question that make it just as interesting, if not more interesting, than the possibility that the universe we're living in might be running in a computer simulation.

Now if you've done any sort of physics research into virtual reality simulations, you're going to have 2 questions for me:

1. Are the computers running these virtual reality simulations *so powerful* that even if we had access to all of the energy in the visible universe, that wouldn't be enough to build and run them?
2. Are the computers running these virtual reality simulations *so powerful* that they can solve problems that the founding fathers of computing deemed to be uncomputable, such as solving the halting problem?

And, naturally, my answer to both of these questions is no, otherwise we wouldn't be able to build them with our current understanding of physics. I'll explain what these questions mean and why I'm answering them that way after explaining a bit more about what this writeup is about.

Putting someone in virtual reality

For the last several decades, computing power has essentially grown at an exponential rate, and it always looked as if in about 10 years into the future we would run into some seemingly unsurmountable problem that would prevent computing power from significantly increasing beyond that. But each time that prediction was made, sometime later people would find a solution to that! So people have tried to predict how long it would take until computers become as smart as every human on earth if this trend continued, making a ton of dubious assumptions in the process, but most people who've done that ended up with a number around a timeframe from about 2020 to 2060. [http://library.fora.tv/2012/10/14/Stuart_Armstrong_How_Were_Predicting_AI at 10:15] That's probably within my lifetime! So it's fun to speculate about what these computers from around 2060 would be capable of. Even if those predictions are wrong and it takes much longer for computers to become that smart, it's fun to speculate about what really powerful computers would be capable of anyway.

Virtual reality simulations are already pretty good these days. I'd imagine that virtual reality simulations around 2060 would be *really* good, possibly so good that to a virtual person living in one, it would look pretty convincingly like a real universe. Now the simulation doesn't have to be programmed to behave anything like our universe. Our universe behaves with some sort of combination of general relativity and the standard model, but the simulation doesn't have to behave that way and people in the future could program it to behave any way they wanted. That said, if we wanted to predict what the simulation would do, we could still in theory measure the states that all of the particles in the computer were in, and use the standard model and general relativity (or even just look at the computer program and the hardware specs) to get a pretty damn good idea of how the simulation would behave. So no surprises there.

But still, wouldn't it be fun to live in one of these simulations that doesn't have to behave like our universe? Perhaps it could be done like this. People have already done experiments where they put implants into rat brains and had them communicate with each other. [http://www.guardian.co.uk/science/2013/feb/28/brains-rats-connected-share-information] In 2060, it wouldn't be too much of a stretch to suppose that people could do this with human brains as well, and that there could be so much bandwidth transfer between the brains that people hooked up this way would feel like a single person. After all, single celled organisms came before multicellular organisms, and you can think of multicellular organisms such as us as a bunch of single-celled organisms hooked up in such a way that they're dependent on each other. Despite that, we each still feel like a single person. So how would it feel if we hooked up multiple people's brains together? Better yet, what if we hooked up one of our brains to the brain of someone in a computer simulation? Would we collectively feel like a single person then?

We won't know that until we actually try it. Right now we can't do that so we don't know the answer. I think it is reasonable to assume that the answer is yes, and the rest of my thought process assumes that the answer is yes too. If the answer is no then the rest of this writeup is completely irrelevant. I guess we'll find out in the not too distant future!

So let's say someone does that and they are now a single person that lives in both the real world and a virtual reality world. And then the part of the person living in the real world gets into a tragic accident and gets their brain blasted into a million pieces, and no more nondeterministic data (such as what the real world side of the person is thinking) is fed into the simulation. How unfortunate. But now they completely live in a virtual reality world that doesn't have to behave anything like our own! How awesome is that? Of course, the part of the person that was in the real world also happened to program the virtual reality simulation, and they transferred their knowledge to the virtual reality part of their brain when they got hooked up. So the person now in the virtual reality can still predict what will happen to them in terms of general relativity and the standard model, so in a sense they still really live in our universe.

By the way, I made another assumption there, which is that when the real world part of the brain got blasted into a million pieces, the person still lived on in the virtual reality world instead of just dying. I think this is a realistic assumption because people have done surgeries where they removed half of someone's brain and they still lived on OK. [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hemispherectomy] If this turns out not to hold true with part of the brain in the real world and part of the brain in a virtual reality world, then the rest of this writeup is completely irrelevant. I hope we'll find out about that in the not too distant future as well!

If these assumptions are correct, we now succeeded in getting someone from living completely in the real world to living to the greatest extent possible in a virtual reality world. If our technology progresses fast enough, that person may very well be you or me! And even though that person knows that they really live in a bigger universe that follows general relativity and the standard model, the virtual reality simulation sure *feels* convincing.

The problem

Now there's something that you can do with virtual reality simulations that I find really fascinating. I don't know how computers will work in 2060, but computers right now have dedicated places where they store their current state, such as memory and hard disks. It's possible to hibernate the computer so that its current state is frozen onto disk, copy the data on the disk to a second computer with the same specs, then start up both computers. If both computers operate correctly and the simulation is completely deterministic, then when the simulation resumes, it will behave the same way on both computers.

This raises a question I find really fascinating. If someone did this to 2060-era computers running deterministic virtual reality simulations, would the people inside (which could very well be you or me) be able to tell which computer their simulation was running in?

I could be wrong, but as of 2015, I don't think anyone knows the answer to that. So let's try to come up with an experiment that will determine the answer. (Later I will mention a potential problem with the proposed experiment, but let's describe the experiment first.) In the virtual reality world, we put a clock on the wall. After disconnecting the real world part of the person and copying the simulation to the second computer, we wait until the clock in the virtual world hits a certain time communicated in advance to the person inside. At that moment, we destroy the computer with the original copy of the simulation, but leave the simulation running in the second computer.

If the very act of copying the data between the computers changed the simulation state in such a way that the person inside could tell that it was done, then this "kills" the person in the original computer and he/she won't be able to perceive anything after that moment. If this happens, then it would mean that people in virtual reality simulations can tell which computer their simulation is in.

On the other hand, if the person still finds him/herself to be alive after the clock passes the agreed upon time, then it means that at some point his/her identity "jumped" from the first to the second computer. For this to be possible, the virtual person would need to have been unable to distinguish the possibilities of being in the first or the second computer when they were running the same simulation. Thus, if this happens, the person in the simulation can conclude that people in virtual reality simulations cannot tell which computer their simulation is in.

If we do this experiment and the person in the virtual reality simulation finds that they always can tell which computer they're in, then this doesn't raise any issues with our understanding of the universe. But the reason that I find this question so fascinating is the possibility that such people *can't* tell which computer they're in.

Suppose we do the experiment a little differently, and we copy the simulation state into 2 other computers (instead of just 1) before destroying the original computer. If the person still finds that he/she is still alive after the virtual clock passes the time that the original computer is destroyed, then the person will know that he/she is in one of the two remaining computers, but will be unable to tell which one they're in because both computers are running the same simulation. So at this point, we give the person a way to tell which computer they're in by flashing a color in the virtual world, flashing red in one computer and green in the other. (The choice of which computer flashes which color can be delayed as long as possible to ensure that both computers have the same simulation state until that point.) If the plan to do this is communicated in advance to the person in the simulation, then this raises a new question for that person: how can he/she predict the probabilities of seeing a red flash or a green flash before it occurs?

I find this especially fascinating because even if the poor soul in the simulation knew both the standard model and general relativity and could somehow calculate in real-time how the individual subatomic particles in the computers would behave, he/she still could only predict in advance what each of the computers would do, not which of the computers the person would personally find him/herself in. So if it turns out that he/she "survives" when the original computer is destroyed, our state-of-the-art physics theories would provide no guidance on predicting the probabilities of seeing a red or green flash, since this would require predicting which computer the person's identity "jumps" to.

Of course, one could predict that there's a 50% chance that the person will see a red flash and a 50% chance that the person will see a green one, but just because there's two possibilities doesn't necessarily mean that each possibility has a 50% chance of occurring. For example, if you consider the possibilities of whether or not you'll be struck by lightning within the next 10 seconds, it is far more likely that you will not be struck by lightning.

As far as I am aware, as of 2015 there is not even a widely acknowledged guess inside the scientific community of what the outcome of this experiment would be. (It could be that one or more of the assumptions I made at the beginning of the writeup are wrong, but as I said, if they are wrong then the rest of the writeup is completely irrelevant.) But hopefully by now you have noticed a very serious problem with this "experiment." Is it really an experiment?

Is this a scientific question?

In order to come up with a new rule for how the universe behaves, people use a process that works like this. First, you make a guess. (In this case, it's that people inside virtual reality simulations can't tell which computer their simulation is running in.) Then, you figure out the consequences of the guess. (In this case, it's that virtual people might find themselves having "jumped" to a different computer using the process above.) Then, you check whether those consequences are correct by comparing them to experience or experiment. (In this case, by putting yourself in a virtual reality simulation and seeing if you can "jump" computers.) If the predictions aren't consistent with the real world then the guess is wrong. [character of physical law; this is common knowledge but feynman does the best job at explaining it]

If it is possible for people to put themselves in virtual reality worlds, then for people who do that, this appears to be a completely valid experiment. But what about for everyone else? Normally, after people do an experiment, they announce the result to the rest of the world so that everyone else can know whether their guesses about the universe are wrong. People inside virtual reality worlds can announce their results too. But in this case, the rest of the world will see *every possible result* of the experiment (unless the virtual person somehow went into a nearly identical simulation running on alien computers, but let's not get into that) and be unable to assign a probability to each outcome! So is this really an experiment?

This also raises another question. Every potential experiment I have thought of to test whether people inside virtual reality simulations can tell which computer their simulation is running in has this same problem. Perhaps there is one that doesn't, and please tell me if you know of one. But if it is indeed the case that no experiment exists to directly answer this that doesn't have this problem, then it raises the question of whether this is a scientific question that can be answered by experiment in the first place.

This question personally drives me nuts. When I think about science, I generally want to spend my time thinking about scientific questions and not unscientific ones. But if I think of a question and I can't figure out whether it's a scientific question, that drives me insane! So guess which science-related questions I spend the most time thinking about?

Below I will describe what happens when I try to answer whether that particular question is a scientific question. Either this is right and the universe is completely insane, or I made some obvious mistake that most other people would notice and I am fooling myself. It is much more likely that I am fooling myself. It is very easy for people to fool themselves. [character of physical law] I have done that in the past [gwep], and I wouldn't be at all surprised if I am doing it again. So if you have taken all the time to read this (you crazy person) and find a mistake or omission in my train of logic here, please let me know so I can get my sanity back. I don't expect anyone to do that, but I am posting this online in the hope that someone will anyway. So if you do that, then I owe you my gratitude. Thanks!

Let's start by assuming that this is not a scientific question. That would mean that this question really has nothing to do with how the universe behaves, and that it is impossible to experimentally prove someone wrong one way or the other about what the answer to the question is. That would mean that from a scientific perspective, it is perfectly valid for someone to believe that people inside virtual reality simulations can tell which computer their simulation is running in. It would also be perfectly valid for someone to believe that such people can't tell. Asking whether someone believes this would be like asking someone which interpretation of quantum mechanics they believe in. Since they all predict the same experimental results, all of these interpretations are valid.

So now we wait until the 2060s and proceed to put you from the real world into a virtual reality world. But suppose that before we do so, we tell you something very special. Not only do we explain to you how the simulation is programmed to behave, but we also teach you the theory of everything, the hypothetical physics theory that can predict to the maximum extent possible the outcome of any experiment that can possibly be performed. Of course, since we're assuming for the time being that the concept of a probability of virtual people "jumping" between computers is unscientific, this theory of everything doesn't have to answer that question.

At this point we do that thing where we copy the simulation onto 2 more computers, blow up the first (original) computer, and flash red in the second computer and green in the third computer. Since we're assuming that it's unscientific to ask whether or not people in simulations can tell which computer they're in, it should be possible for us to hold logical beliefs if we accept either interpretation.

If we accept the interpretation that people in simulations *can* tell which computer they're in, then it'd mean that you'll die when we blow up the first computer, and that the virtual people in the second and third computers are different people that happen to inherit your memories. If you can somehow explain how the copies of you can tell that they're copies even though the bits in computer memory representing their thoughts are the same as yours until the simulations diverge, I suppose that's a perfectly logical thing to believe.

[I'm in the 1st/2nd/3rd computer, so I will die or see a red/green flash]

If we accept the also-valid interpretation that people in simulations *cannot* tell which computer they're in, then it'd mean that you won't die when the first computer blows up, and that you're either going to see a red flash (if you "jump" to the second computer) or a green flash (if you "jump" to the third computer). For those of us watching the computers from outside, that's fine because we see both possibilities. But what are you supposed to think? Even though we taught you the theory of everything, you can't use that to calculate the probability of yourself seeing a red or green flash because we're assuming such a question is unscientific. So you think, "Fine! Maybe the theory of everything doesn't apply here!" And if you're a good scientist, you make your own hypothesis of whether you'll see a red or green flash, and after the flash occurs you continue life as normal.

[Damn it! The theory of everything won't help me predict whether I'll see a red or green flash!]

Hopefully you see at this point that something is not quite right if you can make a hypothesis about what you'll see that the theory of everything won't answer [fix wording], but let's continue the hypothetical.

Well, we successfully messed with your head once. So do you think we're going to stop there? Of course not! Because the next time you

[this doesn't work if people consider it unscientific to ask if possible to put person in computer in the first place, which relies on similar kinds of things of can't tell which is your body]
