According to Wikipedia, the most reliable source ever (sic), "a theory of everything (TOE) is a putative theory of theoretical physics that fully explains and links together all known physical phenomena, and predicts the outcome of any experiment that could be carried out in principle."

One thing I find a bit ironic is that the only scientific theory so far that acknowledges that the laws of physics themselves are uncertain is the scientific method, and this definition doesn't exactly help in that respect. So let's reword this definition.

A theory of everything is a theory that predicts the most that we will ever know about the universe with complete certainty.

Unfortunately, even a theory of everything going by this definition is unattainable because we can't be completely certain about anything. Even when we prove a new mathematical theorem, we can't be completely certain that we didn't make a mistake.

So, then, what do we know is true about the entire universe with _almost_ complete certainty? I am quite certain that life exists on it, otherwise I wouldn't be writing this right now.

Now let's introduce a principle from quantum mechanics. It is called the anarchic principle and it states that if something can happen, then it will happen.

Suppose some advanced civilization in the future has very fast computers, and someone decides to run a simulation of a life form in a virtual universe. The life form only knows about the existance of this virtual universe, which might be very different from the one we live in, and cannot interact with anything outside. The possibility of being "born" into this life form is very small, but if all we know about the universe is that life exists on it, then this possibility cannot be ruled out.

Now let's introduce another idea from quantum mechanics. In quantum mechanics, if 2 identical particles suddenly switched positions, you wouldn't be able to tell the difference.

Suppose that in a different place and time, someone else starts running another simulation that starts out identically to a time in the first simulation, but soon starts to diverge. If the life form from the first simulation switched places with the one in the second simulation, it wouldn't be able to tell the difference because the virtual universes start out identically.

In fact, one can imagine an infinite number of possible universes that start out the same but will immediately diverge. So couldn't the life form switch places with any one of these life forms and not tell the difference?

There's just one problem. I also know with almost complete certainty that all life consists of negative entropy, or a tendency towards greater order or less random situations. In the vast majority of these possible universes, (note: type here)

Which brings us to the hypothesis.

Possibility 1: (note: type here)