The perception of time when living in a simulation

First blog post: so what
Let's raise stakes, repeatedly split simulation 2^n ways where n is number of bits of memory
What the hell would you perceive then?
Deeper question: is everything we will ever perceive the result of super intelligent aliens doing that to us?
Digital physics answer is not yes or no, but that there is no experiment we could perform that would tell us the answer
I consider that to be most fundamental proposition of digital physics

Info box: if proposition is false, how could we figure that out?
Communicate uncountably large set
You: hey, can you tell me every real number between 0 and 1?
A friend: sure! (Lists every real number between 0 and 1)
You: wow, I totally heard all of that, and you actually did list out every real number between 0 and 1! I guess digital physics cannot fundamentally be the right model of the universe!
Possibly relevant: I suspect this would be even harder than proving you have a halting oracle: http://math.stackexchange.com/questions/63961/could-someone-prove-they-had-a-halting-oracle

Actually, proposition just as important is the bit string you'll perceive is computable
does Solomonoff induction work here? https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Omega-regular_language

Back to first question, what would you perceive?
Cannot use SI definitions of distance and time. Does that mean that at most fundamental level of physics, distance and time don't exist?
That may sound like a deeply profound question, but really there is not an objectively wrong answer to that because words are a social construct, so however we answer that, no one can do an experiment that would prove us wrong
So let's come up with convenient definitions of time and distance to use here
You can't necessarily bring atomic clock into your simulation, but you can still ask yourself how long it *feels* like events took
Neuroscientists (?) have done experiments where they asked people that, and it turns out how we perceive time passing is very interesting
Examples: sit on hot stove, how long was vacation, wake up in hospital
What these all have in common is the more information people felt like they remembered about the event, the longer it felt
We have a good mathematical measure for that called entropy
Define perceived time = information gain, perceived distance = information gain had something else happened

Reasonable and unreasonable situations in simulation and how much you remember about them: see speculation 6
  Does entropy math actually work there?
Virtual particles, and is this actually happening to us in every moment of our lives?